But here's the thing, Jesse.
I don't really care about the inner
person.
Buckle up and brace for impact because
our next guest is cultural commentator,
mathematician, and brain masseuse Eric
Weinstein.
Hello. You ready to get some burgers?
Morning. How you doing?
If the ideas in GU are wrong, then
they're just wrong.
When I first met Eric, it was 3 years
ago, and he had just started a movement
called the intellectual dark web. The
movement is not as ominous as it sounds.
In fact, it's just a bunch of
pro-reason, pro-democracy centrist
intellectuals. Other members of the
group included Joe Rogan, Jordan
Peterson, Sam Harris, and last but not
least, Eric's brother, Brett Weinstein,
badass evolutionary biologist,
perennially on YouTube's most wanted
list. So, I thought more people should
be aware of Eric and his ideas. Thus
began a year and a half of meounding him
to start a podcast, an effort that
eventually became The Portal.
Hello and welcome. You found the portal.
my brought my producer Jesse Michaels
here. I was a pain in the ass to this
guy. I did not return his phone calls.
I'd get messages from you that would be
like, "Well, it's 3 days later and you
still don't have a podcast."
The way I describe Eric to people who
might not know who he is is if Stephven
Hawking and Christopher Hitchens had a
baby while listening to a whole lot of
love by Led Zeppelin.
You need cooling. Eric is a complete
polymath. He knows multiple languages.
He plays multiple instruments. He can go
toe-to-toe with the top physicists in
the country. His brain is a rare
mutation.
What is an American tradition?
What is it?
Something a baby boomer did twice.
All night long.
We discuss Eric's theory of everything
in physics, the institutional and
economic headwinds facing young people
in this country, artificial general
intelligence, and even UFOs. What was
that? Please enjoy this special long-
form interview with the love of my work
life, the bane of my existence, and this
week's American Alchemist, Eric
Weinstein.
So, let's just get right into it. It's a
very strange time that we're living in.
Yeah, I was just trying to measure that
actually. How strange? This morning,
let's give people a little history. So
gain of function research is basically
creating trying to look around the
corner on maybe what the next pathogen
or virus will be. Creating it in an
artificial lab setting so that you can
then come up with the cure. Obama
actually sunsets it because he thinks
that it's too dangerous. Fouchi kind of
takes advantage of the chaos of the
Trump administration and restarts the
gain of function funding that the NIH is
doing in 2017.
And we're now giving money to the Wuhan
Institute of Viology, which is a lab
with a poor safety record. A lot of what
this has to do with is bowarfare being
something that we're uncomfortable with
about uh you know just the way it's like
doing chemical weapons research. You
have to do the research in a defensive
capacity. Everything has a dual role. My
point is is that you're listening to
Colonel Jessup.
You snotty little bastard.
You may find my existence repugnant, but
you want me on that wall. You want me on
that post,
right?
And the fact that you can't stomach what
it is, like you may have an idea that
it's really important that we be good uh
kind stewards of the planet. But you
want your burger, don't you? And
somebody's got to kill that cow and uh
and take the organs out and serve it up
so you can pretend that that little
piece of protein
uh you know came from a protein factory,
which it didn't.
Yeah.
Well, that's what Anthony Fouchy thinks.
It's like
for whatever reason, I'm the guy that
you've put in this position to handle
this really terrible portfolio of things
we're not supposed to be doing, but we
have to be doing.
Not gain of function.
But if you think about it, we we do this
with our military. We tell the military
what it can and cannot do and then we
find out that it uses contractors
because they may not be covered under
what you can ask the military to do. For
example, you might put your secrets
inside of an aerospace company because
you don't want to hold them inside of
government because inside of government
they're vulnerable.
Lawyer requests and
likewise tyranny of censorship. You want
that done through private corporations
because the government uh is under all
sorts of requirements not to do that.
Mhm.
So when people say things like, "Well,
it's a private company. It can do
whatever it wants." Well, not really.
Um, you know, you ever tried to produce
food and not say what the ingredient
list is? Uh, it's pretty tough to sell
food,
right?
Right. Okay. Why don't I know what the
ingredient list is in the algorithms
that mutate my conversations?
I can't see a thing. And at some level,
we farmed out tyranny to private
companies.
Let's talk about what CO exposed. Um, as
far as the dynamic between the US and
China for a second. So, very broadly and
crudely speaking, we've moved away from
a manufacturing economy towards more of
a kind of service-based economy and
we've become dependent on supply chains
abroad for all sorts of essential goods
and services. We basically outsourced
our sort of self-sufficiency and so what
do we do? It feels like we've done
nothing as far as
we don't exist. I think you're thinking
too small. Okay.
I don't think when you say the US and
China that you're talking about two
countries. You're talking about a
country that exists, which is China,
and a country that has existed in the
past that does not exist now. And that
what happened in World War II is that we
had such a coherence that it took a very
long time for the decay function to
eradicate the ability of that country to
do things. And now we've gotten to that
point where we're looking for a disaster
to call us into being a country again.
That's right. And our elites are
inherently trans.
Sorry, we don't have any.
Okay.
So, the elites aren't.
Yep.
Sitting in an elite chair does not make
you elite any more than sitting in a
pilot seat in a plane gives you the
ability to fly it. Somebody once asked
George Burns, "Do you play the violin?"
He says, "I don't know. I never tried."
You want an elite surgeon for your
child's heart operation.
Sure.
You want elite commandos to go in and
take the bad guys out without hurting
anybody else. Mhm.
But we don't want an elite anywhere else
cuz we keep hearing about the elite, the
elite, the elite. Well, they aren't.
Mhm. Is it safe to say that Wall Street,
consulting, and big tech are all good
examples where the incentives around
protecting America,
those are after self-enrichment. You've
picked three really interesting, weird
examples because these are like the only
places where smart college graduates can
reliably go to earn six figures if
they're willing to work themselves to a
crisp.
And you're that's the only way to not
have debt basically is to do one of
those three things.
Well, you didn't mention porn or
cannabis.
Those are also possible new creators.
Well, look, I I I did this program with
uh Sugar Baby University, and I tried to
shock the boomers and say, "You do
realize that you're selling your your
daughters into gray area prostitution
through sugar dating?"
And they don't even hear it.
They, you know, you ask your kids going
to college campuses, how many people do,
you know, are sugaring in order to make
sure that they graduate without debt?
And it's an open secret among the kids.
It's just
there's not much of anything left,
Jesse. What we're doing is we're
watching the decay of things that were
built by previous generations and we're
not excited to get up off the couch.
Is there any way to reboot any of these
institutions?
Sure. Sure. Sure. Sure.
How do we do that?
Well, first of all, you have to pick
one. We don't know which one. We don't
know how.
Yeah. But assume that you could take
back one and you gave it the ability to
say no. It'd be very easy, for example,
to endow a university to just insulate
it.
We're going to take the most dangerous
safe thinkers.
Yeah.
Who actually have new ideas that are
reasonable and not mean-spirited, and
we're going to make sure that they're
not subject to to market forces so they
can do whatever they want and we protect
them. But you have individuals who are
still not dead.
That's a great segue into
You've attempted to almost do the
impossible, which is to coalesce these
sort of atomized truthteller gadflies
where sometimes small disagreements
between them make it hard to kind of
create a coherent unit. And I think if
if I were to create one sort of pin for
all of it, you might be it. How do you
do that?
We try it.
It works vaguely,
but you need brick and mortar and you
need people who are empowered and you
need people with stakes in the game. I
mean, it's just I get very bored of
saying this because it doesn't do good
things for me. Yes, I am trying to
coalesce people. But let's be honest,
nobody wants to put FU money into people
who actually say FU. You're not
comfortable with actual heroes.
I think that's right. I mean your line
on it is Charles Lindberg was our last
hero.
Well, he was a a scoundrel.
He was a scoundrel. He was a scoundrel.
Didn't like our people.
He did not. But the point was he was a
national hero
who had the power to lead the country
out of a war orientation and say this is
a Jewish British problem. America first.
And the idea that an individual would
amass that kind of power was something I
think that we the government we official
learned. we can't have anymore. And
it feels like there's a general malaise
among my generation and Gen Z to some
extent. Millennials own 4.8% of the
wealth in this country. Look at a city
like LA.
Real wages
have basically stagnated, maybe risen
slightly, and then cost of living has 20
to 30xed. If you just look at, you know,
take like real estate or something like
that. Yeah. Doesn't [__] make any
sense anymore. You guys need to fall in
love with each other and get each other
pregnant and deal with the
responsibility of the consequences of
that those actions. And you're not
equipped.
Yeah.
And as as I'm fond of saying, I love you
guys not as much as I love Gen Z. Gen Z
is my children,
right?
So you guys are my audience, but Gen Z
is my kids. So I love you, but not as
much as Gen Z.
Your parents don't love you as much as I
love you guys. And that's what kills me.
[Music]
All of that is basically algorithmic.
And it's the algorithms that break your
heart. You don't realize that Paco Bell
is emotional
because it's not even music. It's math.
So, the reason that it's your parents'
wedding song
is that your parents wanted people to
feel. So, they chose an algorithm.
Talk about boomer neglect.
Who understands these people? No one.
You had to go through what they went
through
to understand their crazy mindset. And I
and I don't mean to say that
individually
we don't have lovely relationships with
them. We do. But they went through
something. What what did they go?
Because it I mean it feels like in some
sense they went through nothing. They
benefited from massive growth post World
War II. You know 46 through 64 is the
rough sort of range. And so that I feel
like creates all sorts of weird
psychological dynamics where you're
given if you were to buy real estate
between the you know 50s and the 80s and
like on the coasts.
Yeah.
The amount of wealth you acrew just
through that
right. Our whole story is off one. The
greatest generation, which supposedly
won World War II by fighting the Germans
handtoh hand and blah blah blah, always
ignores that the Soviets did a ton and
the physicists finished it off in in
Japan, you know. So yeah, we took
casualties and people went through
things and they saw things, but we
didn't go through Stalenrad, you know.
So first of all you have this problem
that a lot of gis came back home as the
conquering heroes who didn't see the
kind of action let's say that the
Soviets saw. Then you have the silent
generation that follows the greatest
generation which actually you know Joe
Biden comes from that generation. We've
gone backwards from boomers into the
silence now. Um and they sort of grow up
with this postworld war II prosperity
that they can't get to work. So Joe
Biden begins as a 29-year-old senator in
1972.
Yeah.
Right. And then the boomers are like
after this and they're set to be the
first generation that can't get the
American dream to work.
And because of the culture of personal
responsibility, the idea of just failing
at the American dream doesn't it's like
not an option.
So China becomes the source of the
American dream. Right.
It's really the Chinese dream of getting
wealthy Americans to sell things off to
China so that they can pretend to live
better than their parents
in a weird way. So then what's Gen X? We
we're we're the jetwash generation. We
follow the boomers and the silence. We
get a chance to see the world that they
sort of saw. We're the last ones who
have any vision of, you know, functional
like journalism. I remember functional
journalism from when I was five in
Vietnam.
Um, and we we grow up in a 75 year peace
bubble,
you know, so we don't know reality.
Yeah.
You guys know less about reality because
you didn't even see the tail end,
right,
of functional society.
And Gen Z is looking at all of us and
saying, "Are you all just effing crazy?"
Yeah. So if if something close to 40% of
the wealth that millennials hold is in
one set of hands of a guy who's on a
hydrooil with an American flag for July
4th saying, "Hey, we've got a terrible
labor shortage. Please give me all the
visas so I don't actually have to pay my
workers."
Yeah.
No.
Right.
You can't do that.
Because that's an advertisement for
redistribution of wealth. If you want an
unequal society as I do
where different levels of ability and
different levels of drive and risk
management are rewarded at different
levels, it can't be this dumb. This is
an argument for communism. Our current
capitalism is an argument for communism.
We need a capitalism that is an argument
for capitalism.
Is there a point at which if you're, you
know, a burgeoning tech entrepreneur and
you start to scale and you start to make
money and you start to connect with
people at high levels of society, you
just sort of become co-opted and all of
your ideas go out the window.
Well, nobody plans for what success is
going to do to them.
We talked about this earlier on the car
ride over. It's sort of a sila and
kuribbdus a young person has to face and
on the one hand it's work on scholarly
academic things but don't get any
support you can't really do too many
interesting things or it's you know go
into commercial activity try to make as
much money as possible but lose the plot
what are you doing
I'm attempting to marry
confuse them
the two I know and it's uh very it's a
tightroppe act and I don't know if I'm
going to pull it off
that's why I'm
Thank you, Eric.
No, because this is an amazing idea. If
you can not get sucked in to doing cool
stuff that gets you clicks, and keep in
mind, you're going to get captured by
your audience. If you can fuse these two
things, then you can potentially do
something financial that creates the
monetary input to allow you to do
something scholarly that allows you to
gain insight to inform your ability to
make more money. If you can get that
figure eight thing going,
yeah,
that's the holy grail.
Let's talk about another example of this
in Elon Musk. I think you both have the
same premise, but then come to almost
vastly different conclusions as to what
to do about that premise. He seems to
think that we need to get off this earth
with physical rockets.
No, no. He thinks that we need to get
off this earth.
Mhm.
Let's start there.
Yes. Same premise.
The same premise.
We don't know if he thinks that it's
with rockets or rockets is the best he
can do. If you believe that humans have
to diversify because a single planetary
surface effectively creates one
synchronized experiment, you'd have to
ask how many different ways are there of
getting off of this planet. And there's
getting off with the chemistry and
physics that we know, which is rockets.
And we know that that's good enough for
the moon and marginally it may be good
enough for Mars. super tough to imagine
that working, but okay, you can imagine
a space station or two. You can even go
crazier and imagine Titan around Saturn.
But Elon's a physics guy. He's he's got
a physics background.
The other great option is to say
Einstein
recovered Newton in a limit. You may be
able to evade
faster than light problems because
faster than light is about spaceime.
That's an Einsteinian concept.
GU is intended
to
say here are some extra parameters that
you've never had access to that can
recover relativity theory.
So relativity might live within
something broader.
Right. Well, and in GU, you can say
exactly where it lives.
Now, that's an insanely exciting
prospect. And you went on Joe Rogan and
presented this to the world.
This is all very hard for the average
person to follow. But I think it's not
about person.
I understand that. But I'm saying I
think it would be incredibly valuable
just release it for the average for to
everybody. Yeah. And this is my cursory
understanding, but it's like it feels
like there are what, like five people on
Earth or something who could even try to
like read this stuff. Maybe there are no
people on Earth. I don't know.
How How do you get this stuff out?
People don't understand what I did or
why I did it because it's it's different
enough and it was weird enough that they
didn't grasp it. It wasn't about
teaching Joe Rogan physics inside of a
show.
It's about the fact that
there is no way now to go back
and take that theory
away because there's a record of when it
happened.
And the reason that Joe Rogan's program
is so important is it has so many
eyeballs on it. So, I think that there's
a famous scene in one of the Mission
Impossible movies where Tom Cruz has to
meet with people who want him dead and
he chooses to meet in a public square
and he's got the only copy of the
information inside of his head so that
killing him will destroy the
information.
Right? In in essence, that's the sort of
a problem academics has become so
poisonous, so focused on enforcing the
rules that nobody can afford to think
you in order to get things right, you
have to get things wrong.
And we won't allow people to get things
wrong unless it's part of a program
that's been blessed.
So that was a timestamped, ubiquitously
seen.
That was the point of it. People didn't
understand it. The other thing is is
that um there are no protections inside
of science for taking somebody else's
work and putting another person's name
on it
and this was a good protection.
Well, and I put something saying that I
choose to be an entertainer
rather than a scientist and therefore it
has copyright protection. So where do we
go from here on GU in terms of
somebody
is going to have to actually grasp
the ideas inside of GU.
But here's the thing, Jesse. I don't
really care about the inner person.
I I want a nice life. I want my family
left alone,
right? And I want to be insulated so I
don't need to worry every day.
But it's the ideas. If the ideas in GU
are wrong, then they're just wrong.
If the GU ideas are right, but they're
small errors, as there have been every
time anybody's accomplished anything in
this kind of a way,
yeah,
fine.
Yeah,
not a big deal. Let's fix some errors.
But people have this these like weird
things that they want to do. They want
to turn this into drama. So for example,
Einstein and Hilbert
supposedly, you know, Hilbert almost
scooped Einstein, but Einstein pulled it
out of the No, nothing like this
remotely happened. Einstein and Grossman
were on general relativity. Hilbert did
something. Even if Hilbert had gotten
there first, it wouldn't have mattered.
The ideas were from Einstein.
We want to create moronic horse races
because it's exciting.
You have like eight different frames.
Like you can go Yeah. You could talk to
a biologist, you can talk to a
physicist, you can talk math. Uh you're
a cultural commentator. And so, you
know, I might have annoyed the [__] out
of you in the process of trying to get
you to start the portal.
That just No, come on. The issue was I
didn't want to become famous.
Yeah. I wanted my ideas to become famous
and I wanted to be the owner of those
ideas. If it weren't for you, I wouldn't
know that the problem isn't getting the
ideas out there. You can get the ideas
out there. The problem now is that the
ideas are like seeds that need to find
soil and rain and the proper
temperature. And we we don't have that
at the moment. We we have a world in
which um you can teach a person to fish.
You're not even giving them fish. You
can teach them to fish and they will
starve for lack of like they won't
understand that when you're gone they
have to go fish.
We don't have culture that's proper.
Like it's really important to understand
how counterintuitive the the US where we
live is as an intellectual system. We
expect you to not take advantage of all
of the freedoms that we give you. The
purpose of freedom is not understood by
people. And I I often compare it to
thing like freedom, potential, and
sperm.
You're not supposed to use all of it.
Yeah.
Right. So, you have potential. You could
do anything in your life, but you're not
going to both become an opera singer and
a Formula 1 driver
uh and a nutrient uh company CEO and
etc., etc., etc. You're not going to get
to do everything. Every life is about
the foregoing
of opportunity.
There's something about the hard choice
thing that seems lost on my generation.
We seem to all have an illusion of
omnipossibility.
Well, and that's what that's all you've
been given. You've been given your
future because you're not being given
your present.
And the future that you're being given
is largely elucer,
right?
And that thing is making me crazy
because I would rather deal you guys in
on a future that's real. My favorite
tweet that I let off recently was
something about for all of you who
decided to have a kid during I have to
be careful not to tear up on camera, but
people started sending me ultrasounds
like we've got two in the in the oven
and you know we have to thank you for
telling us to have kids and I realized
nobody's yelling at you guys get
married, have the babies. Yes, it's all
it all sucks. You don't have the money.
Don't waste your fertility windows.
Don't waste your ability to to to form
families. Yes, it's tough and there is
divorce and things go wrong and people
come to hate each other. But you know
what? A lot of those dysfunctional
families
are still families. Family is barely
doable. But it is barely doable.
And quite honestly, I want to see you
guys delt. And you know, for me, the um
I think that the thing I like least
about being famous is having a family
because you can't protect your there's
so many psychopaths in the world. And it
doesn't mean that there's like tens of
thousands of psychopaths. But it just
takes a small amount of psychopathy to
get you to really come to look at this
fame question differently. I think it's
very interesting to think about media as
sort of not a loss leader. Maybe it's a
loss leader, maybe it's it's break even,
but um you're creating a lighthouse for
really young high agency people. And
then you invest in them and venture
economics might be riskier, but they're
a whole lot better than ads and the
BuzzFeed model. And so is the media
company of the future actually
media as kind of the the front and then
the back end is investing.
Well, that's the funnel theory. And you
know, my belief about this was there's
clearly a rollup play where you take the
people that people want to listen to and
you put them inside a container and then
you let the rest of the system hate on
it. And it's not Fox News because it's
not conservative. It's an easy play. I
don't know why it doesn't happen. I
don't understand where we are. I just
don't know the people who want to do it.
We should do it.
Let's do it.
Okay. I want to talk about UFOs. A
subject which if I brought this up with
you three years ago, you probably would
have said Jesse, shut the hell up.
Well, you did try to bring it up. What
did happen?
You said Jesse, shut the hell up.
Yeah, except I didn't use the word hell.
No, you didn't. But you you know I think
reasonably
you were like this is wacky and crazy
and
it's dumb.
It's dumb.
It's incredibly dumb. The idea that you
would have phenomena
Mhm.
that can only be seen by special people
and that there's no good video of it and
we have a world full of smartphones.
We've got video of absolutely everything
is completely stupid and insane.
Yeah.
And I was wrong.
What's changed since?
Nine pages came out from the Pentagon.
Six of which are relevant. Three, I
think, you know, it's like a a cover and
a back page. I don't know what it is.
And it's very clear in that report that
that report was meant to be as dull as
is humanly possible about the most
exciting thing that you could possibly
imagine, which is that either we're
engaged in an incredible psychological
operation coming out of the Pentagon
or some people inside the Pentagon
believe with near certainty that we've
been contacted and observed by extra
extraterrestrials
uh visiting Earth. That's pretty insane.
And what's really crazy is that the data
is locked up. You just said we talked
about the government is not attracting
our best and brightest scientists. Why
are the top physicists in the country?
Why are the top astronomers in the
country not looking at
nobody that I know
who's very good at physics or
astrophysics or astronomy or anything
knows what the hell's going on.
And
I've never seen anything remotely like
this, Jesse. I thought you were
completely wrong. This is a situation
where you would not come off of this
point. And I was convinced that you were
brain damaged on this one issue. No, I
really was.
It's fair.
And you were right. I was wrong.
I appreciate that.
I don't understand it. It doesn't really
The key thing is whatever is going on is
non-Capernac.
We're not in a situation we all have
equal access to the same thing. Either
it's a scop and almost nobody has
information about it or there's
something out there that fits this
paradigm that is not trying to be
noticed. And I've given the example of
North Sentinel Island where India
manages North Sentinel Island but
doesn't land there. And in such a
circumstance, there would be a fermy
paradox among the natives of North
Sentinel Island. Why why don't we see
anybody almost ever,
right?
And the answer is, well, you're sort of
owned and you're being protected from
anybody landing on your shores. Now, if
that's what's going on,
that's astounding.
That's astounding.
On the other hand, if human if humanity
has a future, and I'm right, so I'm
happy to give you your due, but give me
mine.
We we have a future because we got off
this planet and we diversified.
Now, if we got off this planet and
diversified and that's how we survive,
then it means anyone else out there
could come here.
And not with rockets. We're pretty sure
that they're not on the moon and they're
not on Mars in secret colonies, I would
imagine.
Do you have a sense on the genetic
stuff? It feels like a lot of people are
just waiting for the data to come in and
they talk a lot about biioinformatics
and as long as we it's just a big sort
of pattern matching issue and as long as
we have you know uh genetic sequences
and we're matching them with phenotypes
and we get this big harmonized database
right now it's a exist in a bunch of
silos you know you have BGI UK bio bank
whatever we just put them all together
and then we know exactly the genetic
code I tend to think that's not the
case. It's not just a data collection
problem. Do you have sort of an opinion
on that?
It's very interesting what's going on
with machine learning on something like
protein folding where if you manage to
attack something with machine learning,
you don't always understand why you were
able to solve what your machine was able
to solve. It's very hard to interpret a
successful neural net,
right? Yes. What did it find? What did
it understand?
Black box
somewhat. Maybe we'll get to the point
where you can inspect the black box. I
don't know.
But one thing you can say is that okay,
if you can get better at protein folding
using some sort of a deep learning
system,
then there's probably something there
that can be understood analytically.
Um, so I'm excited about some of the
data science, but people are really
looking for data science to replace
thinking.
Totally. Same. And it's very interesting
because the old issue with artificial
intelligence was trying to get something
to be intelligent. The dirty little
secret is intelligence was needed for
almost nothing. So with mere deep
learning, you were able to do all sorts
of things that we previously thought may
have required intelligence.
Yes. I think a line I have on AI is it's
like the Daff Puck song. Uh harder,
better, faster, stronger. And that's all
it can do. It can do what humans can do.
And sometimes it's harder, better,
faster, stronger. Sometimes it's not
even as good as as humans. But that is
different than innovation. Brute force
is different than innovation. Whenever I
see a startup that says we're resting on
some data set or AI to create
innovation,
I'm always fairly skeptical of it just
being sort of a data collection problem.
I think real innovation is interdomain
knowledge and consilience. GU for you is
interdommain knowledge. And so I I don't
think a AI is very good at that right
now.
You know, it's it's not a morality play.
You see, we'd like I I love the romance
of science where Jim Watson and Francis
Crick are able to figure this thing out
that Lionus Pauling cannot. And
that's one thing,
but sometimes you can easily imagine
that
the problem wasn't what you thought it
was. It was much easier or you could
prove that it's it's undecidable or
something like this. So, you have to
sort of not overlay what is true with
what is meaningful.
It would be great if human intelligence
had a place going forward for the rest
of eternity, but I I think that you'll
get to the point where the songs that
you love are written by computers and
it's going to flip you out. And then the
question is going to be, well, do you
start caring less and less about music
the way we care less and less about
chess?
Um, you know, what does it really mean
if two chess machines go at it? Do we do
we really want to play through this as
if this is speaking to the human soul? I
don't know about that. I do think that
none of this really matters. We have a
very brief window to to save ourselves.
And the way out is super romantic. It's
beautiful,
but we're not motivated. It's like
nobody wants to follow David Gogggins.
Nobody wants to follow Jaco Willink.
Those guys want to get up at 4 4 in the
morning and start training. And I don't
see that on on behalf of our scientific
community. And I don't think the
machines at least can search while
everybody else uh you know pops an
edible and
right
watches Netflix.
Maybe AI which is one of the few areas
where people say things are accelerating
is actually just a form of learned
helplessness and outsourcing our agency.
I think it is. I think that at some
level um
we're going to find that it's not good
enough to know whether things are true
or that something can do them. We're
going to want to know why things are
true. And I think
I think that that's part of the game is
what what if we can actually predict
protein folding fairly well, but nobody
has any idea of how we're able to do
that. How much is that going to actually
hold us back? And so I I do think that
we're going to get to a point where
we've learned some things
and we're now angry that we don't know
why the things that we know how to do,
we we just don't know why. We know how.
And I I think that that kind of ruthless
pragmatism
eventually will cause itself its own
problem. We'll be too powerful with too
little wisdom. We're going to have all
sorts of things that we know how to do
that we're going to have unintended
consequences of because we don't know
how it's working.
We don't understand the bedrock
foundation.
I agree with you, sir.
Okay, let's go eat.
Let's go eat.
What kind of cheese for your
cheeseburger?
Uh, it's American cheese.
Can I get a hamburger with lettuce only?
It's going to be 151 17 first day.
Thanks. But you going paleo.
You got a lettuce wrap.
Right.
I don't know what I got.
Here's something I've been thinking
about recently. An ironic effect of
Snowden is there are all these
revelations.
You had Prism, Buller Run, Heartbeat.
The NSA has a back door into everything
was the revelation.
and then we can't we didn't do anything
about it. And think about the panopticon
effect that that ends up having on an
individual where it's like we know that
they can hear and listen to everything
that we do and say and it's indexed and
searchable
and then you also we're not really doing
anything about it. The halfsed mirror
only works if the people behind the half
silvered mirror rarely if ever intrude
into your life in a distinct
identifiable fashion.
So
I think that the new thing that we
believe is different. I think that the
new thing that we believe is yes they're
watching us but for some reason they
can't afford to let us know what they
know.
So most of the information they have is
useless
because you'd be crazy to sacrifice the
whole program to go after somebody with
an unpaid library fine.
What are you excited about? Like crazily
excited about that doesn't involve
money?
I think there are certain anomalies and
uh I'm not excited about those things in
their current form, but I want to I want
to do them in more rigorous ways. So
like the UFO thing like stuff stuff like
that.
Make 12 figures just to be safe.
12 figures.
Yeah,
we can put that back there.
First of all,
my friend,
yeah, there's a way in which growing up
in Los Angeles,
the primary association is that home is
alienation.
In some sense, I don't feel like I'm
home unless I'm in a place of of
alienation. Sort of like I've likened it
to growing up in a Durico painting,
some industrial landscape where you've
abandoned everything. There's a child
with a hoop
running down the street. There's
nothing. And for me, in a weird way, the
the Doors are are maybe the
quintessential LA band. Of course, you
had the Birds and all that kind of
stuff.
Yeah. Speaking of The Doors and Great
Music, you know, I live in Laurel
Canyon.
It's a pretty amazing music history
there. Are you aware of it?
Some of it. I mean, I I I definitely go
to the store where the creatures meet
and uh I'm familiar with the romance of
Wonderland Avenue and Carol King's
Tapestry has been a place of pilgrimage
for myself and my daughter where she
wrote it. Uh Laurel Canyon and Tanga
Canyon are to the extent that LA has
spiritual energy, probably the two
places that have the strongest spiritual
energy.
It was such a weird place, too. I mean,
I know Jim Morrison's dad,
Rear Admiral Steven Morrison was in the
Navy and in charge of the Gulf of Talin.
Yeah.
Really crazy.
That's a very strange one. Um, and as
you point out, Lookout Mountain is a CIA
facility in Laurel Canyon and the whole
history of drugs and the government and
Vietnam and espionage and all this kind
of stuff. Very hard to sort out.
It's hard to sort out. Very weird. There
are all these sort of anomalous bizarre
facts. It feels like LA was a crazy
place in the 80s. It was dangerous. It
was exciting. Now it feels like a weird
Instagram hologram thing. You go to Boa
Steakhouse and there are tick tockers
everywhere. Saddle ranch.
Feels like a weird
Every place is over.
Okay.
And I mean that.
That's
You can't move to New York and say it's
happening in New York. It's going down
in Austin.
No. No. You're not getting it, man.
We're going to move to the Black Rock
Desert. Burn Burning Man's Burning Man's
going to be 365.
None of that's true. No place is
happening. There are things that are
happening, but they're happening between
people.
Sometimes they're happening between
people who have never actually met in
person. But I've always thought that
secretly this was an incredibly
intellectual
town.
Yeah, I think it's both. I think there
are many LA's and that lack of identity
as frustrating as it can be to deal with
makes me hopeful towards creating a
laurel canyon
of tech science out there ideas
and cool [__] I detect a spark of
inspiration. I think in a weird way
I've come back after 37 years away. I
was conceived in Laurel Canyon. I was
born in what is now the Church of
Scientology. It used to be Cedars of
Lebanon.
That's amazing.
And I ran away from this place at 16 so
hard and so fast. I never thought I
would be back.
Um, and I explored the world and I lived
in places that I needed to. I went back
to Philadelphia, which was my family's
ancestral seat to the extent that you
can claim something as immigrants in the
US. went to Boston, which I thought was
the center of academics and science.
Moved to New York, which was hot for
hedge funds, at least it could support
creativity and rulebreaking. Moved out
to San Francisco to do tech. Went to
Jerusalem and for two years because it's
the
belly button of the universe.
And I think I came back to LA not quite
sure why I was here anymore. What I'
what I think I've
put together is it's not happening
anywhere.
It's happening wherever you happen to be
and wherever you can make it happen. And
there's no point in in city chasing,
right? Like, you know, something is
pulling me towards Austin. Somebody else
is saying, "Come to Montana. Come to
Miami."
And I think at this late stage in the
game, I'm actually back home. I'm from
this place. My son is the fifth
generation now of Los Anelenos in our
family, which effectively never
happened.
Yeah.
And you know, whether it's the the flood
from the the dam that burst in
Baldwin Hills or whether it's the 71
earthquake or the Bair fire,
you know, in some sense there was
somebody from my family here for all of
those things.
And
you know what I said to Brad Eastston
Ellis is LA is this weird town where
everybody has lived here because if
you've consumed media, so much of it is
shot in Los Angeles
that you actually have a feel for this
place whether you live here or not.
Yeah. And even though it sort of feels
vapid and and random and pointless at
times, I think about
maybe it's magic is is that it's it's
several different things. It's an oil
field. We live on an oil field. It's an
aerospace place. It's like the home of
the rain corporation.
It's not really clear that it's just an
entertainment entertainment. Yeah, once
upon a time maybe that was really really
dominant.
But in a certain sense
it's just a big canvas and maybe maybe a
laurel canyon of heterodoxy
for different things for science for uh
future pointed culture that isn't
necessarily
so easy to to pin down to popular music.
May maybe it's time and maybe it can be
done here. But uh but I think I'm home.
I I can't follow that. Eric, thank you
for doing this, man. That was beautiful.
Let's Let's end on that note.
Jesse, thanks for a great day.
I love you, man.
You, too, man.
[Music]